docs: Add extended v1 changelog (#200)
Quantinuum/guppy-docs: sphinx/v1_changelog.md

---
file_format: mystnb
kernelspec:
  name: python3
---

# Guppy Version 1.0 Changelog

Guppy v1 is the first stable release of the Guppy quantum programming language. It introduces several major new features alongside a number of breaking changes and new behaviours.

While new features will still be added in subsequent minor versions and there may be changes to the standard library, the core language is now considered stable, meaning there won't be any changes to the syntax and semantics of core language constructs.

This extended changelog intends to provide a convenient overview of major new features in this release, see the [changelog](../sphinx/guppylang/guppylang/CHANGELOG.md) for a detailed list of all changes and the [language guide](language_guide/language_guide_index.md) for detailed feature documentation.

```{note}
To see just the breaking changes and instructions on how to update existing code, please see the [migration guide](v1_migration.md).
```

## New quantum constructs

### A new `Measurement` type

> Guppy has a new dedicated [`Measurement`](../api/generated/guppylang.std.quantum.Measurement.rst) type. Values returned from measurement functions now have this type instead of returning a `bool` directly. See the [language guide section on measurements](language_guide/measurement.md) for the design rationale behind this and the relevant migration guide section [here](v1_migration.md#the-stdquantummeasure-function-now-returns-a-measurement-rather-than-a-bool).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Guppy has a new dedicated [`Measurement`](api/generated/guppylang.std.quantum.Measurement.rst) type. Values returned from measurement functions now have this type instead of returning a `bool` directly. See the [language guide section on measurements](language_guide/measurement.md) for the design rationale behind this and the relevant migration guide section [here](v1_migration.md#the-stdquantummeasure-function-now-returns-a-measurement-rather-than-a-bool).
```

### Control and dagger modifiers

> You can now transform gates, blocks of quantum operations, and functions automatically using modifiers. 

Reviewer 2: mention what control and dagger to explicitly

@guppy
def controlled_inverse(c: qubit, q: qubit) -> None:
    with control(c), dagger:
        s(q)

controlled_inverse.check()
```

See the [modifier guide](TODO) for usage details and examples.

## Extensions to the type system

### Protocols

Protocols are a powerful way of constraining polymorphism: they let you define a set of required methods, and any type that implements all of them automatically satisfies the protocol.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from typing import Self
from guppylang.std.quantum import Measurement

@guppy.protocol
class Measurable:
    @guppy.require
    def measure(self: Self) -> Measurement: ...

Measurable.check()
```

Guppy v1 also introduces some special built-in protocols, namely `Callable` (see the [migration guide](v1_migration.md#new-function-type-in-guppy-replacing-callable-in-annotations) for what this means for previous use of `Callable`).

Read more about protocols in the [language guide](TODO).

### Structs are now mutable

Structs are now mutable by default, also making them affine by default, see the relevant migration guide section [here](v1_migration.md#guppy-structs-are-now-mutable-by-default).

### Type aliases

> Guppy now provides the ability to give an existing type another name using the `guppy.type_alias` function. Read more about type aliases in the [language guide](TODO).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Guppy now provides the ability to give an existing type another name using the `guppy.type_alias` function. Read more about type aliases in the [language guide](language_guide/data_types/aliases.md).
```

This crossref should work if you merge in `main`.

## Comptime improvements

### More support for generics

> You can now use generic variables in the type signature of comptime functions. However, explicitly specifying type arguments for both functions and structs is not supported yet.

Reviewer 2: there is a mixture of active voice ("you can") and passive ("it is now possible"), suggest consistent use of passive throughout
